 Book Review: How the Revolution Took Tibet 

For China, dominating a territory on the periphery means co-opting, coercing and controlling local actors


A territory far from Beijing is absorbed into China—and changed forever. Under specially negotiated terms, its people are promised considerable autonomy and the preservation of their distinctive lifestyle. Those with deep local roots—even those who don’t share China’s Marxist predilections—are allowed to hold positions of power and defend the interests of their people. At first, the experiment goes well. Then, in the capital, a charismatic strongman grows impatient. Local leaders become compliant. Grass-roots resistance intensifies and is met with force. The experiment ends in sadness and suffering.
This could be a sketch of Hong Kong today, which finds Xi Jinping eliminating the last vestiges of the “high degree of autonomy” the city was supposed to enjoy under the “one country, two systems” framework. It could equally be an account of Tibet from 1950 until 1959, the year the Dalai Lama—who initially thought he could work with Mao Zedong to preserve a partially autonomous Tibet—fled for India. The Tibet experiment has rarely received close scrutiny, despite the lionization of the Dalai Lama and the widespread allure of Tibetan culture in the international imagination. But this spring, such a terrible season in many regards, has been an extraordinarily good one for works in English on Tibet during the Mao era.
Xiaoyuan Liu’s “To the End of Revolution: The Chinese Communist Party and Tibet, 1949-1959” (Columbia, 401 pages, $35) offers a detailed, top-down look at this early effort at expansion by Beijing. We see how the Seventeen Point Agreement, which outlined the terms of Tibet’s autonomy within China, turned out to be filled with hollow promises. Growing disenchantment with Beijing’s heavy-handed intervention eventually erupted into the 1959 uprising. Tibetans barricaded the streets of Lhasa, attacked local officials seen as helping Beijing undermine their promised autonomy and skirmished with much-better-armed People’s Liberation Army troops. Beijing responded by shelling the Dalai Lama’s summer residence and ultimately taking control of local temples and palaces. Tens of thousands of Tibetans lost their lives that year.
Mr. Liu, a specialist in Communist Party policy who teaches at the University of Virginia, mines official documents—from speeches by top leaders to minutes of committee meetings—to reveal the debates and divides that shaped the story of Tibet during the 1950s and places the experiment’s failure into a sophisticated analytic frame. He emphasizes the difficulties present from the start in reconciling the Communist Party’s nation-building goals and its interest in political conformity with Tibetans’ own ideas about who should have power and how it should be wielded. For Beijing, asserting control of Tibet was nothing short of crucial, we are told, “for maintaining the security and stability of their newly founded communist state.”
Benno Weiner’s “The Chinese Revolution on the Tibetan Frontier” (Cornell, 286 pages, $45) presents arguments that complement Mr. Liu’s but is livelier in style. The author, a sociocultural historian at Carnegie Mellon University, takes a bottom-up approach, focusing on what made local actors tick and bringing their experiences to life. There is also a geographical contrast: Whereas Mr. Liu’s book is primarily concerned with the Tibet Autonomous Region, which includes the sacred city of Lhasa and the surrounding villages and temple complexes historically under the Dalai Lama’s control, Mr. Weiner provides a case study of Amdo, a territory “roughly the size of France” that was incorporated into China after the Communist victory over the Nationalists. Amdo may not be part of the Tibet Autonomous Region, but it is one of the main regions making up “what is often referred to as ‘greater,’ ‘cultural,’ or ‘ethnic’ Tibet.”
The arrival of these two books is accompanied by a major publishing event, the translation from Chinese of “Forbidden Memory: Tibet During the Cultural Revolution” (Potomac, 408 pages, $39.95), one of the most important books on Tibet during the final years of the Mao era. Its author, Tsering Woeser, formerly a Lhasa-based journalist who now lives in Beijing and writes essays and poems, is the leading Tibetan public intellectual in China. Her book is organized around photographs that her father took, mostly in the mid-1960s, documenting such things as the struggle sessions and humiliation parades of the Cultural Revolution as they occurred in Tibet. Few of its actors are of China’s majority Han ethnicity; in rallies denouncing the alleged enemies of the revolution and expressing fervent loyalty to Mao, the main participants are Tibetans. As in Hong Kong today, dominating a territory on the periphery of China means co-opting, coercing and controlling local actors.
The Chinese edition of “Forbidden Memory” was published almost 15 years ago in Taiwan, where it made a big splash. This new edition, translated fluidly by Susan T. Chen, comes with an elegantly crafted, informative yet concise editor’s introduction by Robert Barnett, a leading scholar of and public commentator on contemporary Tibet. Mr. Barnett provides valuable background on Tibet’s history. More importantly, he explains how promulgating an account of the territory’s past that distorts particular themes—for instance, overstating how often Tibet was considered part of China’s empires—is crucial to legitimizing Beijing’s draconian policies there. In a region where human-rights abuses are rampant, “control of the past has been central to China’s management of the Tibetan issue,” we are told, “and still today little is more tightly controlled there than writing about history.”
Xi Jinping, like Mao, is a muscular nationalist who likes to present himself as a martial yet scholarly figure, but he does not share the latter’s love of mass campaigns. Similarly, there are many differences between the terms by which Hong Kong was promised a “high degree of autonomy” and the assurances given to Tibetans in 1950. The divergence from Marxism in Tibet was not toward attachment to a capitalist and cosmopolitan mode of life, in a setting with strong rule-of-law and civil-society traditions, as it has been in Hong Kong, but to an Inner Asian variant on Buddhism. The term “one country, two systems” was not used in Tibet 70 years ago, even if the structures put in place back then bring this later formulation to mind.
History never exactly repeats itself. Still, it was an eerie experience to toggle between these three books and news of Beijing’s limiting of local liberties in Hong Kong, eerier still to write this review as Hong Kong’s leader, Carrie Lam, paid a deferential visit to Beijing and told the official media there, as the anniversary of 1989’s June 4 massacre approached, that she had no problem with the central authorities determining how sedition would be defined in Hong Kong.
With yet another grand experiment spiraling into tragedy, it is valuable to have accounts like these that help us understand how a notable precursor imploded.
Mr. Wasserstrom teaches Chinese and world history at UC Irvine and is the author, most recently, of “Vigil: Hong Kong on the Brink.”
